[Music plays]
(Narrator) Our story
begins in the warm pool,
the place in the Pacific
where the trade winds sweep
the world’s warmest ocean.
Here clouds form
as warm air rises.
Across the Pacific clouds gather
at three large meeting places.
These meeting places
have scientific names.
There’s the South Pacific
Convergence Zone,
the Intertropical
and the West Pacific Monsoon.
These cloud meeting places
move throughout the year,
causing the usual wet
seasons and dry seasons.
Some years they move
to different areas
because of changes in trade
winds and ocean temperatures.
This in turn causes
changes to rainfall,
sea levels, and
tropical cyclone risk.
Scientists call these changes
in the air and ocean El Niño
and La Niña.
In an El Niño event
trade winds weaken,
warmer water moves to the east,
and the cloud meeting places
move closer together.
El Niño brings big changes
to the temperature,
rain, and sea level
in our region.
In some countries, such as
Papua New Guinea and Palau,
it can cause dryer weather
and lower sea levels,
sometimes leading to food
and water shortages.
[Splash]
During El Niño tropical
cyclone risk increases
in the east in places like the
Southern Cook Islands and Samoa.
[Music plays]
[Wind howls]
And in countries along the
equator, like Kiribati,
El Niño usually brings more rain
and sometimes higher sea levels,
which then lead to flooding.
It can also mean a better time
to catch tuna in Kiribati
as the fish follow the
warmer water into this area.
El Niño and its impacts
usually last for one year,
and then things
return to normal.
But El Niño can last longer.
In some years the opposite
of an El Niño occurs.
Scientists call this La Niña.
In a La Niña event the
trade winds get stronger,
pushing warmer
water to the west,
and the cloud meeting
places further apart.
In some countries
close to the equator,
such as Tuvalu and Nauru,
La Niña can bring less
rain and even drought.
This can affect locally
grown food sources like
taro, banana, and grapefruit,
and sometimes lead
to water shortages.
In other countries, like Fiji
and the Solomon Islands,
La Niña usually
brings warmer oceans,
more rain, and can
cause flooding.
This can lead to
coral bleaching,
waterlogged crops, and
increase risk of diseases like
typhoid and dengue fever.
In the Solomon Islands La Niña
also causes higher sea levels.
El Niño and La Niña are
not climate change.
They are part of the
natural climate system.
El Niño and La Niña will continue
to happen in the future,
but climate change may intensify
some of their impacts.
Learning how to adapt
to the ups and downs
of El Niño and La Niña
will help to prepare for
long term climate change.
Some El Niño and La Niña events
are more severe than others.
Your local weather office is always
watching El Niño and La Niña
to provide temperature,
rain, and cyclone forecasts
that your island is likely to
receive in the months ahead.
It’s important to undertake
activities to prepare your area
for the impacts of El
Niño and La Niña events.
There are many ways to do this.
Be sure to keep up to
date with the forecast
from your local weather office,
and take time to make plans
for the season ahead.
[Music plays]